Common to CSE and allied stream branches of engineering only      1  
 
 
BIOLOGY FOR ENGINEERS (CSE) Semester IV 
Course Code BBOK407 CIE Marks 50 
Teaching Hours/Week (L:T:P: S) 2:0:0:0 SEE Marks 50 
Total Hours of Pedagogy 25 Total Marks 100 
Credits 02 Exam Hours 3 
Examination type (SEE) Theory 
 Course objectives: 
 To familiarize the students with the basic biological concepts and their engineering 
applications.  
  To enable the students with an understanding of biodesign principles to create novel 
devices and structures.  
  To provide the students an appreciation of how biological systems can be re-designed as 
substitute products for natural systems.  
 To motivate the students to develop interdisciplinary vision of biological engineering. 
 Teaching-Learning Process (General Instructions) 
These are sample Strategies, which teachers can use to accelerate the attainment of the various course 
outcomes.  
1. Explanation via real life problem, situation modelling, and deliberation of solutions, hands-on 
sessions, reflective and questioning /inquiry-based teaching. 
2. Instructions with interactions in classroom lectures (physical/hybrid). 
3. Use of ICT tools, including YouTube videos, related MOOCs, AR/VR/MR tools. 
4. Flipped classroom sessions (~10% of the classes). 
5. Industrial visits, Guests talks and competitions for learning beyond the syllabus. 
6. Students’ participation through audio-video based content creation for the syllabus (as 
assignments). 
7. Use of gamification tools (in both physical/hybrid classes) for creative learning outcomes. 
8. Students’ seminars (in solo or group) /oral presentations. 
Module-1 (5 Hours) 
CELL BASIC UNIT OF LIFE 
Introduction.  Structure  and  functions  of  a  cell.  Stem  cells  and  their  application.  Biomolecules:  Properties 
and  functions  of  Carbohydrates,  Nucleic  acids,  proteins,  lipids.  Importance  of  special  biomolecules: 
Properties and functions of enzymes, vitamins and hormones. 
Module-2(5 Hours) 
APPLICATION OF BIOMOLECULES 
Carbohydrates in cellulose-based water filters production, PHA and PLA in bioplastics production, Nucleic 
acids in vaccines and diagnosis, Proteins in  food production, lipids in biodiesel and detergents production, 
Enzymes in biosensors fabrication, food processing, detergent formulation and textile processing. 
Module-3(5 Hours) 
ADAPTATION OF ANATOMICAL PRINCIPLES FOR BIOENGINEERING DESIGN 
Brain  as  a  CPU  system.  Eye  as  a  Camera  system.  Heart  as  a  pump  system.   Lungs  as  purification  system. 
Kidney as a filtration system. 
Module-4 (5 Hours) 
NATURE-BIOINSPIRED MATERIALS AND MECHANISMS:  
Echolocation,  Photosynthesis.  Bird  flying,  Lotus  leaf  effect,  Plant  burrs,  Shark  skin, Kingfisher  beak.  Human 
Blood substitutes - hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers (HBOCs) and perflourocarbons (PFCs). 
Module-5(5 Hours) 
TRENDS IN BIOENGINEERING:  
Muscular  and  Skeletal  Systems  as  scaffolds,  scaffolds  and  tissue  engineering,  Bioprinting  techniques  and 
materials. Electrical tongue and electrical nose in food science, DNA origami and Biocomputing, Bioimaging 
and Artificial Intelligence for disease diagnosis. Bioconcrete. Bioremediation. Biomining. 
19.07.2023
BBOC407
----------------Page (0) Break----------------
Common to CSE and allied stream branches of engineering only      2  
 
 
Course outcome (Course Skill Set)  
At the end of the course, the student will be able to : 
1. Elucidate the basic biological concepts via relevant industrial applications and case studies.  
2. Evaluate the principles of design and development, for exploring novel bioengineering projects.  
3. Corroborate the concepts of biomimetics for specific requirements.  
4. Think critically towards exploring innovative biobased solutions for socially relevant problems. 
Assessment Details (both CIE and SEE)  
The weightage of Continuous Internal Evaluation (CIE) is 50% and for Semester End Exam (SEE) is 
50%. The minimum passing mark for the CIE is 40% of the maximum marks (20 marks out of 50) 
and  for  the  SEE  minimum  passing  mark  is  35%  of  the  maximum  marks  (18  out  of  50 marks).  A 
student  shall  be  deemed  to  have  satisfied  the  academic  requirements  and  earned  the  credits 
allotted to each subject/ course if the student secures a minimum of 40% (40 marks out of 100) in 
the  sum  total  of  the  CIE  (Continuous  Internal  Evaluation)  and  SEE  (Semester  End  Examination) 
taken together.  
 
Continuous Internal Evaluation:  For the Assignment component of the CIE, there are 25 marks and for the Internal Assessment 
Test component, there are 25 marks. 
 The  first  test  will  be  administered  after  40-50%  of  the  syllabus  has  been  covered,  and  the 
second test will be administered after 85-90% of the syllabus has been covered 
 Any two assignment methods mentioned in the 22OB2.4, if an assignment is project-based then 
only one assignment for the course shall be planned.  The teacher should not conduct two 
assignments at the end of the semester if two assignments are planned.  
 For the course, CIE marks will be based on a scaled-down sum of two tests and other methods 
of assessment. 
Internal   Assessment   Test   question   paper   is   designed   to   attain   the   different   levels   of   Bloom’s 
taxonomy as per the outcome defined for the course.  
Semester-End Examination: 
Theory  SEE  will  be  conducted  by  University  as  per  the  scheduled  timetable,  with  common  question  papers 
for the course (duration 03 hours). 
1. The question paper will have ten questions. Each question is set for 20 marks. 
2. There  will  be  2  questions  from  each  module.  Each  of  the  two  questions  under  a  module  (with  a 
maximum of 2 sub-questions), should have a mix of topics under that module. 
3. The students have to answer 5 full questions, selecting one full question from each module.  
4. Marks scored shall be proportionally reduced to 50 marks
. 
Suggested Learning Resources: 
Books 
 Biology for Engineers, Rajendra Singh C and Rathnakar Rao N, Rajendra Singh C and Rathnakar Rao 
N Publishing, Bengaluru, 2023. 
 Human Physiology, Stuart Fox, Krista Rompolski, McGraw-Hill eBook. 16th Edition, 2022  
 Biology  for  Engineers,  Thyagarajan  S.,  Selvamurugan  N.,  Rajesh  M.P.,  Nazeer  R.A.,  Thilagaraj  W., 
Barathi S., and Jaganthan M.K., Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, 2012.  
 Biology for Engineers, Arthur T. Johnson, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis, 2011  
 Biomedical Instrumentation, Leslie Cromwell, Prentice Hall 2011.  
 Biology for Engineers, Sohini Singh and Tanu Allen, Vayu Education of India, New Delhi, 2014.  
 Biomimetics: Nature-Based Innovation, Yoseph Bar-Cohen, 1st edition, 2012, CRC Press.  
 Bio-Inspired   Artificial   Intelligence:   Theories,   Methods   and   Technologies,   D.   Floreano   and   C. 
Mattiussi, MIT Press, 2008.  
 Bioremediation   of   heavy   metals:   bacterial   participation,   by   C   R   Sunilkumar,   N   GeethaA   C 
Udayashankar Lambert Academic Publishing, 2019.  
19.07.2023
----------------Page (1) Break----------------
Common to CSE and allied stream branches of engineering only      3  
 
 
 3D  Bioprinting:  Fundamentals,  Principles  and  Applications  by  Ibrahim  Ozbolat,  Academic  Press, 
2016.  
  Electronic Noses and Tongues in Food Science, Maria Rodriguez Mende, Academic Press, 2016 
Web links and Video Lectures (e-Resources):    
 https://nptel.ac.in/courses/121106008  
 https://freevideolectures.com/course/4877/nptel-biology-engineers-other-non-biologists  
 https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/20-020-introduction-to-biological-engineering-design-spring-2009  
 https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/20-010j-introduction-to-bioengineering-be-010j-spring-2006  
 https://www.coursera.org/courses?query=biology  
 https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc19_ge31/preview  
 https://www.classcentral.com/subject/biology  
 https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/biology-basic-concepts  
Activity Based Learning (Suggested Activities in Class)/ Practical Based learning 
 Group Discussion of Case studies  
 Model Making and seminar/poster presentations  
 Design of novel device/equipment like Cellulose-based water filters, Filtration system 
 
19.07.2023
----------------Page (2) Break----------------
